Here's a versatile template for solving any Data Structures and Algorithms (DSA) problem.
You can follow this structured approach to break down and solve a problem methodically:

DSA Problem-Solving Template.

1.Understanding Part : Understand the Problem Statement
  - What is being asked?: Carefully read the description to identify the problem's objective.

2.Imformation Extracting Part:
  - Input data type - with this identification we come to know what are things availabe for that like methods available, time complexity
  - Output data type - Understand what output is expected 
  - Time complexity expectations if any.
  - Consider the Constraints - Input size - helps to thing how big the input

3.Identification Part: Identify the Type of Problem.
  - Recognize patterns

3.Thinking Part.
  - Break the Problem into Smaller Subproblems like Subproblems as Steps to acomplish the task.
  - Solution for smaller problems.
  - combine the smaller subproblems.

4.Thinking into Code Converting Part
  - Choose the Right Data Structures
  - Design the Algorithm
    - Convert the smaller problem into code.
    - Combine all the smaller code for the Complete Solution.


------------------------------------- HAVE TO UPDATE THE BELOW INFORMATION AND TEST WITH ABOVE INFORMATION ---------------------------------------------

/*
9.Write the Code that Handle the Edge Cases.
10.Test the Code.
11.Optimize the Code.
11.Test the Solution.
12.Analyze Time and Space Complexity.
*/

1. Understand the Problem Statement
Read the problem carefully:What is being asked?: Carefully read the description to identify the problem's objective.

2. Extract Key Information
Identify the input data type and output format (e.g., array, list, string, number).
Note the constraints:Input size (e.g., n, the array size).
Time complexity expectations (e.g., O(n), O(log n), etc.).
Understand what output is expected: Indices, values, Boolean results, etc.

3. Identify the Type of Problem
Recognize patterns:
Searching (binary search, linear search)
Sorting (quick sort, merge sort)
Greedy algorithms (minimizing/maximizing)
Dynamic programming (overlapping subproblems, memoization)
Graph problems (BFS, DFS, shortest path)
Recursion or backtracking (divide and conquer)

What technique or data structure can help?
Arrays, Linked Lists, HashMaps, Heaps, Graphs, Stacks, Queues, Trees, etc.

4. Consider the Constraints
Time Complexity:
What’s the maximum input size?
What algorithm is best suited to the constraints?
If n is large, avoid brute force O(n^2) approaches, look for O(n) or O(log n) solutions.
Space Complexity: Are you using extra space (hash maps, recursion stack)? Consider memory usage.

5. Break the Problem into Smaller Subproblems
Divide the problem into subtasks or steps.
Example:
If the problem requires sorting and then finding a pair, break it down into a sorting step and a pair search step.
Think about intermediate results or reusable parts (subproblems or overlapping subproblems).

6. Handle Edge Cases
Consider cases where the input is:Empty arrays, lists, or strings.
Arrays with only one element.
Arrays where no solution exists.
Negative numbers, zeros, very large or very small numbers.
Explicitly test and handle these cases in your solution.

7. Choose the Right Data Structures
Selecting data structures that help solve the problem efficiently:HashMap/Set: For fast lookups or checking uniqueness.
Array/Linked List: For sequential access and modification.
Stack/Queue: For problems involving order (LIFO/FIFO).
Heap: For problems that require finding the min/max efficiently.
Graph: For traversals, shortest path, or connectivity problems.
Tree: For hierarchical data storage and operations like search.

8. Design the Algorithm
Outline the algorithm step-by-step:Input processing (parsing, conversion).
Main logic (looping, recursive calls, applying a specific algorithm).
Final output.
Write the algorithm in pseudocode before jumping to code:Write it in simple,
natural language or basic syntax that represents your thought process.

9. Write the Code
Code iteratively: Start with the basic structure, then fill in details as you go.
Handle edge cases early in the code (e.g., empty lists, no solution).
Focus on clarity over brevity—comment if necessary.

10. Optimize the Solution
After your initial solution works:Consider if you can reduce time complexity by improving algorithms.
Can you use more efficient data structures?
Are there redundant operations that can be avoided?
Evaluate your solution's space complexity—could you reduce memory usage?

11. Test the Solution
Test with multiple test cases:Standard test cases from the problem statement.
Edge cases: empty input, one element, negative values, very large/small values, etc.
Verify correctness: Ensure the solution works for both typical and edge cases.

12. Analyze Time and Space Complexity
Time Complexity: Analyze the number of operations based on the size of input (e.g., O(n), O(log n), O(n^2)).
Space Complexity: Analyze the memory used (e.g., O(n) for an array, O(1) for a constant space solution).
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Check if the solution fits within the problem's constraints.

Example Problem Breakdown Using the Template
Problem: Given an array of integers, 
find two numbers that sum up to a target value. Return their indices.

Input:
nums = [2, 7, 11, 15],
target = 9

Output:
[0, 1]


Step 1: Understand the Problem Statement
Input: Array nums, target sum.
Output: Indices of two numbers that sum to the target.

Step 2: Extract Key Information
Constraints: Array size can be large (e.g., n = 10^5).
Output should be the indices of the first valid pair.
We should avoid an O(n^2) brute-force solution due to time constraints.

Step 3: Identify the Type of Problem
Searching: We're looking for a pair of numbers in the array.
Optimization: Using a hash map will allow us to find pairs in O(n) time.

Step 4: Consider the Constraints
We need to solve this problem in linear time (O(n)).
We’ll use O(n) space to store previously seen numbers (hash map).

Step 5: Break the Problem into Subtasks
Step 1: Iterate through the array.
Step 2: For each number, compute its complement (target - num).
Step 3: If the complement exists in the hash map, return the indices.
Step 4: If no pair is found after iterating through the array, return None.

Step 6: Handle Edge Cases
Edge case 1: Empty array—return None.
Edge case 2: Array with no valid pairs—return None.
Edge case 3: Array with only one element—return None.

Step 7: Choose the Right Data Structures
We’ll use a hash map (dictionary) to store numbers as we go through the array,
allowing constant-time lookup for the complement.

Step 8: Design the Algorithm
Pseudocode:Create an empty hash map
For each number in the array:
Calculate the complement (target - num)
If complement is in the hash map:
Return the indices
Add the current number to the hash map
Return None if no pair is found

Step 9: Write the Code
def two_sum(nums, target):
hashmap = {}
for i, num in enumerate(nums):
complement = target - num
if complement in hashmap:
return [hashmap[complement], i]
hashmap[num] = i
return None

Step 10: Optimize the Solution
The algorithm is already O(n) in time and space complexity, which is optimal for this problem.

Step 11: Test the Solution
print(two_sum([2, 7, 11, 15], 9)) # Expected output: [0, 1]
print(two_sum([1, 2, 3, 4], 8)) # Expected output: None
print(two_sum([], 5)) # Expected output: None

Step 12: Analyze Time and Space Complexity
Time Complexity: O(n) (one pass through the array, with constant time hash map lookups).
Space Complexity: O(n) (hash map stores each number once).

Final Notes
By following this template, you can break down and solve any DSA problem in a systematic way,
ensuring you cover all necessary steps and considerations for efficient solutions.
